+++
title = "Shellbin Project writeup"
date = 2026-03-04
slug = "shellbin"
+++


## Introduction

While this site serves as a portfolio for some projects, I also want it to be detailed enough to where other people trying to learn software developement can benefit from it.

Even though it's a very simple and common usecase, there *isn't really* a full article that explains how to set up even a dead-simple microservice CI/CD system onto a Kubernetes cluster. 
There's also a few knowledge gaps regarding the differentation between the developement and build process of microservice software and the continuous integration and deployment aspects of it.


It's my hope that this article can fill these knowledge gaps and serve as a decent reference for someone trying to build a dead-simple microservice CI/CD system



## Prerequisites
- Kubernetes cluster
- Container registry
- todo

## Overview

There are two main aspects of this project:
1. Creating the micoservice software
2. Programatically deploying the software onto a Kubernetes cluster.


## Closing

A person once said that ["microservices are technical debt"](/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LcJKxPXYudE/).
To expand, he stated that the advantage of microservices is they allow seperate teams to completely own and develop in seperate part of a larger software systems.

Certainly, because I am single person and not a large team, the developement of this project did not strongly benefit from microservices.

If there's anything I want to communicate, it's just this:
1. I'm comfortable working with microservices and think they have value in certain situations.
2. I'm not an acolyte of microservices, and am familar with the large trade-off compared to monoliths.
